OSSM-6302 [DOC] Tempo + OTEL configuration (#77583)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-configuring-distr-tracing-tempo.adoc

//There is no common attribute for OpenTelemetry Collector.

You can create a {OTELName} instance in a mesh namespace and configure it to send tracing data to a tracing platform backend service.

.Prerequisites

* You have created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing the distributed tracing platform (Tempo)" in the "Additional resources" section.

* You have installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.
//`openshift-operators may need to be updated to `openshift-opentelemetry-operator

.Procedure

. Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace. This example uses the `bookinfo` namespace:
+
[source, yaml]
----

> apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1beta1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
```

We still need to use v1alpha1 API version. That's the only API documented from tracing team doc side.

kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo # <1>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
          http:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster. local:4317" # <2>
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp]
----
<1> Include the namespace in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
<2> In this example, a TempoStack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. You don't have to include the TempoStack namespace e.g. `tracing-system` in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
+
[NOTE]
====
You only need to create one instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector in one of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member namespaces.
====

> . Check the `otel-collector` pod log and verify that it is running correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Check the `otel-collector` pod log and verify that it is running correctly.
  $ oc logs -n bookinfo  -l app.kubernetes.io/name=otel-collector
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-configuring-distr-tracing-tempo_{context}"]
= Configuring the distributed tracing platform (Tempo) and the Red Hat build of OpenTelemetry

> You can expose tracing data to the {TempoName} by appending a named element and the `opentelemetry` provider to the `spec.meshConfig.extensionProviders` specification in the `ServiceMehControlPlane`. Then, a telemetry custom resource configures Istio proxies to collect trace spans and send them to the OpenTelemetry Collector endpoint.

Reviewer 2: Change `ServiceMehControlPlane` to `ServiceMeshControlPlane`

//There is no common attribute for OpenTelemetry Collector.

You can create a {OTELName} instance in a mesh namespace and configure it to send tracing data to a tracing platform backend service.

.Prerequisites

* You have created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing the distributed tracing platform (Tempo)" in the "Additional resources" section.

> * You have installed the {OTELOperator} in the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

Reviewer: Have you included the two more information links in the "Additional resources" ?

Author: Yes.

If you check the Preview link, and click on "Additional Resources," you'll see one for Tempo and one for OTEL.

https://77583--ocpdocs-pr.netlify.app/openshift-enterprise/latest/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-observability.html#additional-resources_user-workload-monitoring

> * You have installed the {OTELOperator} in the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

Reviewer 3: is it required to have the OTEL Operator in `openshift-operators` namespace? Because, by default, it is recommended by OTEL bundle to be installed into `openshift-opentelemetry-operator` namespace
![image](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/16251792/a9307913-4147-4bb2-a6e1-7e987869333f)

Author: @yxun can you confirm if `openshift-operator` needs to be updated to `openshift-opentelemetry-operator`? 

`openshift-opentelemetry-operator` is also used in Distributed Tracing's instructions: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.15/observability/otel/otel-installing.html 

Might have been an update since you wrote out your instructions earlier in the month.

Reviewer: OTEL operator can be installed in either namespace. Because we install our operators (OSSM operator and Kiali operator) in `openshift-operators` namespace, it will be easier for managing them in the same namespace.

We can mention in our doc that users can install OTEL operator in either the default namespace or the `operator-operators` namespace.

> * You have installed the {OTELOperator} in the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You have installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.
```

.Procedure

. Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace such as `bookinfo`:
+
[source, yaml]
----

> apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer 3: @yxun 
There are two warnings when I am trying this yaml with the latest operators:
```
Warning: OpenTelemetryCollector v1alpha1 is deprecated. Migrate to v1beta1.
Warning: Collector config spec.config has null objects: processors.batch:, receivers.jaeger.protocols.grpc:, receivers.jaeger.protocols.thrift_binary:, receivers.jaeger.protocols.thrift_compact:, receivers.jaeger.protocols.thrift_http:, receivers.otlp.protocols.http:, receivers.zipkin:. For compatibility with other tooling, such as kustomize and kubectl edit, it is recommended to use empty objects e.g. batch: {}.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why these unset fields are included in `spec.config`. Can these be omitted?

kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo # <1>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:

>       jaeger:
>         protocols:
>           grpc:
>           thrift_binary:
>           thrift_compact:
>           thrift_http:
>       otlp:
>         protocols:
>           grpc:
>             endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
>           http:
>       zipkin:
>     processors:
>       batch:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      jaeger:
        protocols:
          grpc: {}
          thrift_binary: {}
          thrift_compact: {}
          thrift_http: {}
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
          http: {}
      zipkin: {}
    processors:
      batch: {}
```

Reviewer 3: or we can completely remove it from there if they don't need to be filled in

Reviewer 2: > or we can completely remove it from there if they don't need to be filled in

Yes, I think this would be preferable if explicitly setting the values to empty objects is not required.

Author: It follows the sample from the Distributed Tracing instructions https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.15/observability/otel/otel-installing.html 

Will Service Mesh users be confused if we remove them?

Reviewer 3: on that page, there is `customize the OpenTelemetryCollector custom resource (CR) with the OTLP, Jaeger, Zipkin receivers and the debug exporter.` 

on our page, we have prefilled `.otlp.protocols.grpc.endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317 `. If someone is experienced with OpenTelemetryCollector in order to set different values, they will probably know other values that can be filled as well and we don't need to prefill them. ( just my opinion )

Reviewer 3: or we can add there something like this: 

Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace such as bookinfo:
```
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo 
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317"
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [jaeger, otlp, zipkin]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [otlp]
```
```
NOTE: You can customize the OpenTelemetryCollector custom resource (CR) with others values as well as is described in  Red Hat build of OpenTelemetry documentation
```

Reviewer 2: +1 for this (assuming it does not introduce any validation errors).

Author: Have we verified that there are no validation errors with this suggested change?

Reviewer 3: yes, only the second warning left, 
```
Warning: OpenTelemetryCollector v1alpha1 is deprecated. Migrate to v1beta1.
opentelemetrycollector.opentelemetry.io/otel created
```
however, there is an error in the otel pod
```Error: invalid configuration: service::pipelines::traces: references receiver "jaeger" which is not configured
2024/06/26 07:25:25 collector server run finished with error: invalid configuration: service::pipelines::traces: references receiver "jaeger" which is not configured
```
because `jaeger` and `zipkin` are defined in the config `service.pipelines.traces.receivers`  (The interesting thing is that when you add an empty object there, it is ok )

so, the yaml should be without `zipkin` and `jaeger` in the receivers and `batch` in the processor too  (they are not defined in the yaml anyway so I would say no need to specified that, I don't see the reason why):
```
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo 
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317"
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp]
```

I have tried it with the config above ^ and it works. But better wait for @yxun to confirm.

Reviewer: Thanks, Matej. I have added a suggested change using your simplified yaml example.

Reviewer: Hi @Matej, I tried your simplified example above . However, it's exporter failed to resolve the Tempo distributor service. 

I will add another suggested change example later.

Reviewer: @eoinfennessy @mkralik3 How did you get those "spec.config has null objects:" logs ?
I tried my initial example yaml and here is my log below

```
2024-07-01T17:42:28.870Z	info	service@v0.102.1/service.go:113	Setting up own telemetry...
2024-07-01T17:42:28.870Z	info	service@v0.102.1/telemetry.go:96	Serving metrics	{"address": ":8888", "level": "Normal"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.870Z	warn	jaegerreceiver@v0.102.0/factory.go:49	jaeger receiver will deprecate Thrift-gen and replace it with Proto-gen to be compatbible to jaeger 1.42.0 and higher. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/18485 for more details.	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "jaeger", "data_type": "traces"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	info	service@v0.102.1/service.go:180	Starting otelcol...	{"Version": "0.102.1", "NumCPU": 4}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	info	extensions/extensions.go:34	Starting extensions...
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	warn	internal@v0.102.1/warning.go:42	Using the 0.0.0.0 address exposes this server to every network interface, which may facilitate Denial of Service attacks. Enable the feature gate to change the default and remove this warning.	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "jaeger", "data_type": "traces", "documentation": "https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/security-best-practices.md#safeguards-against-denial-of-service-attacks", "feature gate ID": "component.UseLocalHostAsDefaultHost"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	warn	internal@v0.102.1/warning.go:42	Using the 0.0.0.0 address exposes this server to every network interface, which may facilitate Denial of Service attacks. Enable the feature gate to change the default and remove this warning.	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "jaeger", "data_type": "traces", "documentation": "https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/security-best-practices.md#safeguards-against-denial-of-service-attacks", "feature gate ID": "component.UseLocalHostAsDefaultHost"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	warn	internal@v0.102.1/warning.go:42	Using the 0.0.0.0 address exposes this server to every network interface, which may facilitate Denial of Service attacks. Enable the feature gate to change the default and remove this warning.	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "otlp", "data_type": "traces", "documentation": "https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/security-best-practices.md#safeguards-against-denial-of-service-attacks", "feature gate ID": "component.UseLocalHostAsDefaultHost"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	info	otlpreceiver@v0.102.1/otlp.go:102	Starting GRPC server	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "otlp", "data_type": "traces", "endpoint": "0.0.0.0:4317"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	warn	internal@v0.102.1/warning.go:42	Using the 0.0.0.0 address exposes this server to every network interface, which may facilitate Denial of Service attacks. Enable the feature gate to change the default and remove this warning.	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "otlp", "data_type": "traces", "documentation": "https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/security-best-practices.md#safeguards-against-denial-of-service-attacks", "feature gate ID": "component.UseLocalHostAsDefaultHost"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	info	otlpreceiver@v0.102.1/otlp.go:152	Starting HTTP server	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "otlp", "data_type": "traces", "endpoint": "0.0.0.0:4318"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	warn	internal@v0.102.1/warning.go:42	Using the 0.0.0.0 address exposes this server to every network interface, which may facilitate Denial of Service attacks. Enable the feature gate to change the default and remove this warning.	{"kind": "receiver", "name": "zipkin", "data_type": "traces", "documentation": "https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/security-best-practices.md#safeguards-against-denial-of-service-attacks", "feature gate ID": "component.UseLocalHostAsDefaultHost"}
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	info	service@v0.102.1/service.go:206	Everything is ready. Begin running and processing data.
2024-07-01T17:42:28.883Z	warn	localhostgate/featuregate.go:63	The default endpoints for all servers in components will change to use localhost instead of 0.0.0.0 in a future version. Use the feature gate to preview the new default.	{"feature gate ID": "component.UseLocalHostAsDefaultHost"}
```

You can create a {OTELName} instance in a mesh namespace and configure it to send tracing data to a tracing platform backend service.

.Prerequisites

* You have created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing {TempoName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

* You have installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

* If using Service Mesh 2.5 or earlier, set `spec.tracing.type` to `None` so tracing data can be sent to the OpenTelemetry Collector.

.Procedure

. Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace. This example uses the `bookinfo` namespace:
+
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo  # <1>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:

>         endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # <2>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # <3>
```

        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp]
----
<1> Include the namespace in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.

> <2> In this example, a TempoStack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. You don't have to include the TempoStack namespace e.g. `tracing-system` in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> This sidecar injection annotation is only required when you have enabled a `ServiceMeshControlPlane` `spec.security.dataPlane` mTLS encryption.

<3> In this example, a TempoStack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. You don't have to include the TempoStack namespace e.g. `tracing-system` in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
```

.Prerequisites

* You have created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing {TempoName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

* You have installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

* If using Service Mesh 2.5 or earlier, set `spec.tracing.type` to `None` so tracing data can be sent to the OpenTelemetry Collector.

.Procedure

. Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace. This example uses the `bookinfo` namespace:
+
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo  # <1>
  annotations:
    sidecar.istio.io/inject: 'true' # <2>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # <3>
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:

>         traces:

Reviewer 3: I just noticed that sometimes, I am getting this error 
```
The OpenTelemetryCollector "otel" is invalid: spec.config.service.pipelines.traces.processors: Invalid value: "null": spec.config.service.pipelines.traces.processors in body must be of type array: "null"
```
when I want to update opentelemetry cr. I don't know why don't see that error during the creation.
So probably we should add there empty processors `processors: []` as well.

@yxun @gwynnemonahan

>           receivers: [otlp]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
```

Author: Per Matej via Slack, remove `batch` so it is:

`processors: []`

//There is no common attribute for OpenTelemetry Collector.

You can create a {OTELName} instance in a mesh namespace and configure it to send tracing data to a tracing platform backend service.

.Prerequisites

* You have created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing the distributed tracing platform (Tempo)" in the "Additional resources" section.

* You have installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.
//`openshift-operators may need to be updated to `openshift-opentelemetry-operator

.Procedure

. Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace. This example uses the `bookinfo` namespace:
+
[source, yaml]
----

> apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1beta1
```

apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo  # <1>
  annotations:

>     sidecar.istio.io/inject: 'true' # <2>

Reviewer 4: Does the valid value have to carry the single quotes? I was a little confused by this because the "true" value for [true](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/77583/files#diff-fd2c28f3a14abe8d80f09838366315d2c7b5f44cc550ee9095e2a3ca9dcb1d28R49) below is plain text with no markers.

> apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
> kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
> metadata:
>   name: otel
>   namespace: bookinfo # <1>
> spec:
>   mode: deployment
>   config: |
>     receivers:
>       jaeger:
>         protocols:
>           grpc: {}
>           thrift_binary: {}
>           thrift_compact: {}
>           thrift_http: {}
>       otlp:
>         protocols:
>           grpc:
>             endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
>           http:
>       zipkin: {}
>     processors:
>       batch: {}
>     exporters:
>       otlp:
>         endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317"
>         tls:
>           insecure: true
>     service:
>       pipelines:
>         traces:
>           receivers: [jaeger, otlp, zipkin]
>           processors: [batch]
>           exporters: [otlp]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo # (1)
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # (2)
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp]
```

Author: @yxun what additional information needs to be added for  call out " # (2)" ?

----

> <1> Include the namespace in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Include the namespace in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
<2> In this example, a Tempo Stack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. We don't have to include the Tempo Stack namespace e.g. `tracing-system` in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
```

> <2> The sidecar injection annotation is only required when you have enabled the `spec.security.dataPlane` parameter for mTLS encryption in the `ServiceMeshControlPlane` resource.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<2> The sidecar injection annotation is only required when you enable the `spec.security.dataPlane` parameter for mTLS encryption in the `ServiceMeshControlPlane` resource.
```

[NOTE]
====

> You need to create only one instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector in only one `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You only need to create an instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector in one of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member namespaces. 
```

> <3> In this example, a TempoStack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. You don't have to include the TempoStack namespace e.g. `tracing-system` in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<3> In this example, a TempoStack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. You do not have to include the TempoStack namespace, such as`tracing-system`, in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
```
OK, contractions are allowed, https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=grammar-contractions, but I personally don't like them in documentation. Up to you.

"e.g." takes commas like a clause; ,e.g.,
But I have no idea if either e.g. or i.e translate to, say, Japanese. So better to spell out either intention.
https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/ie-vs-eg-abbreviation-meaning-usage-difference

> . Check the `otel-collector` pod log and verify that it is running correctly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
. Check the `otel-collector` pod log and verify that the pod is running correctly.
```
Does it run _incorrectly_? Or just not at all?

.Prerequisites

* You have created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing the distributed tracing platform (Tempo)" in the "Additional resources" section.

* You have installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the namespace `openshift-operators`. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.
//`openshift-operators may need to be updated to `openshift-opentelemetry-operator

.Procedure

. Create an OpenTelemetry Collector instance in a mesh namespace. This example uses the `bookinfo` namespace:
+
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo # <1>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      jaeger:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          thrift_binary:
          thrift_compact:
          thrift_http:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
          http:
      zipkin:
    processors:
      batch:
    exporters:
      otlp:

>         endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster. local:4317" # <2>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # <2>
```

> apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
> kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
> metadata:
>   name: otel
>   namespace: bookinfo # <1>
> spec:
>   mode: deployment
>   config: |
>     receivers:
>       jaeger:
>         protocols:
>           grpc:
>           thrift_binary:
>           thrift_compact:
>           thrift_http:
>       otlp:
>         protocols:
>           grpc:
>             endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
>           http:
>       zipkin:
>     processors:
>       batch:
>     exporters:
>       otlp:
>         endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # <2>
>         tls:
>           insecure: true
>     service:
>       pipelines:
>         traces:
>           receivers: [jaeger, otlp, zipkin]
>           processors: [batch]
>           exporters: [otlp]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo  # <1>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317"  # <2>
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp]
```

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-configuring-distr-tracing-tempo_{context}"]
= Configuring the {TempoName} and the {OTELName}

You can expose tracing data to the {TempoName} by appending a named element and the `opentelemetry` provider to the `spec.meshConfig.extensionProviders` specification in the `ServiceMeshControlPlane`. Then, a telemetry custom resource configures Istio proxies to collect trace spans and send them to the OpenTelemetry Collector endpoint.

//As of July 2, 2024, there is no common attribute for OpenTelemetry Collector.

You can create a {OTELName} instance in a mesh namespace and configure it to send tracing data to a tracing platform backend service.

.Prerequisites

* You created a TempoStack instance using the Red Hat {TempoOperator} in the `tracing-system` namespace. For more information, see "Installing {TempoName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

> * You installed the {OTELOperator} in either the recommended namespace or the `openshift-operators` namespace. For more information, see "Installing the {OTELName}" in the "Additional resources" section.

Reviewer 5: Latest [repo guidelines](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#lead-in-link-sentence-style-for-non-xref-situations) say leave out statements like `in the "Additional resources" section`

----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel
  namespace: bookinfo  # <1>
  annotations:
    sidecar.istio.io/inject: 'true' # <2>
spec:
  mode: deployment
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: "tempo-sample-distributor.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:4317" # <3>
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: []
          exporters: [otlp]
----
<1> Include the namespace in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
<2> The sidecar injection annotation is only required when you enable the `spec.security.dataPlane` parameter for mTLS encryption in the `ServiceMeshControlPlane` resource.
<3> In this example, a TempoStack instance is running in the `tracing-system` namespace. You do not have to include the TempoStack namespace, such as`tracing-system`, in the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member list.
+
[NOTE]
====
You only need to create one instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector in one of the `ServiceMeshMemberRoll` member namespaces.
====

> . Check the `otel-collector` pod log and verify that the pod is running.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Check the `otel-collector` pod log and verify that the pod is running:
```

  name: basic
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  addons:
    grafana:
      enabled: false
    kiali:
      enabled: true
    prometheus:
      enabled: true
  meshConfig:
    extensionProviders:
      - name: otel
        opentelemetry:
          port: 4317

>           service: otel-collector.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local

Reviewer 3: This is a collector for a particular namespace, bookinfo in this case, right? 
So do I need to have `OpenTelemetryCollector` in each service mesh member namespace, and so, do I need to insert all of them here into smcp as well?

Reviewer 3: ```
do I need to insert all of them here into smcp as well? ( so for each SMMR where I want to grab tracing spans, I need the extension provider specified here, right? )
```
probably not, since the name needs to be `otel`, otherwise it doesn't work. I also noticed that I see traces from all my mesh applications, not only from Bookinfo. So, why the opentelemetrycollector is in the bookinfo namespace and not in the servicemesh namespace namespace if it collects traces from all mesh namespaces? ( it is a little bit confusing now, because, it seems the each application namespaces need a separate opentelemetrycollector)

Reviewer: I answered this in our slack thread.
We only need one instance of the otel collector in one SMMR member namespace such as bookinfo.

We can add a note right after the example yaml manifest.

  name: basic
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  addons:
    grafana:
      enabled: false
    kiali:
      enabled: true
    prometheus:
      enabled: true
  meshConfig:
    extensionProviders:
      - name: otel
        opentelemetry:
          port: 4317
          service: otel-collector.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
  policy:
    type: Istiod
  telemetry:
    type: Istiod
  version: v2.6
----
+
[NOTE]
====
When upgrading from SMCP 2.5 to 2.6, set `spec.tracing.type` to `None`:

> 

Reviewer 4: title, please

  name: basic
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  addons:
    grafana:
      enabled: false
    kiali:
      enabled: true
    prometheus:
      enabled: true
  meshConfig:
    extensionProviders:
      - name: otel
        opentelemetry:
          port: 4317
          service: otel-collector.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
  policy:
    type: Istiod
  telemetry:
    type: Istiod
  version: v2.6
----

. Create a Telemetry resource in the `istio-system` namespace:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: mesh-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: otel
    randomSamplingPercentage: 100
----

> . Verify the `istiod` log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Verify the `otel-collector` pod log.
```
```suggestion
. Verify the `istiod` log.
```

spec:
  external_services:
    tracing:
      query_timeout: 30 #<1>
      enabled: true
      in_cluster_url: 'http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:16685'
      url: '[Tempo query frontend Route url]'
      use_grpc: true # <2>
----
<1> The default `query_timeout` is 30. If you set it greater than 30, you need to update `.spec.server.write_timeout` in the Kiali CR and add the annotation `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=50s` to the Kiali route. Both `.spec.server.write_timeout` and `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=` must be greater than `query_timeout`.
<2> If you are not using the default HTTP or gRPC port for Jaeger or Tempo, replace the `in_cluster_url:` port with your custom port.
+
[NOTE]
====
Kiali 1.73 uses the Jaeger Query API, which causes a longer response time depending on Tempo resource limits. If you see a `Could not fetch spans` error message in the Kiali UI, then check your Tempo configuration or reduce the limit per query in Kiali.
====

. Send requests to your application.

> . Verify the `istiod` pod logs and the `otel-collector` pod logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Verify the `istiod` pod logs and the `otel-collector` pod logs.

.Configuring the {TempoName} in a mTLS encrypted Service Mesh member namespace
[NOTE]
====
You don't need this additional DestinationRule configuration if you have created a TempoStack instance in a regular namespace i.e. not in a Service Mesh member namespace.
====

* When you enabled Service Mesh dataPlane mTLS encryption and you have created a TempoStack instance in a Service Mesh member namespace such as `tracing-system-mtls`, all traffic is TLS encrypted. This is not expected from the Tempo distributed service and it returns TLS error in this scenario.
* You can apply the following example to disable the TLS trafficPolicy for fixing the {TempoName} TLS error.

[source,yaml]
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: tempo
  namespace: tracing-system-mtls
spec:
  host: "*.tracing-system-mtls.svc.cluster.local"
  trafficPolicy:
    tls:
      mode: DISABLE
----
```

spec:
  external_services:
    tracing:
      query_timeout: 30 #<1>
      enabled: true
      in_cluster_url: 'http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:16685'
      url: '[Tempo query frontend Route url]'
      use_grpc: true # <2>
----
<1> The default `query_timeout` is 30. If you set it greater than 30, you need to update `.spec.server.write_timeout` in the Kiali CR and add the annotation `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=50s` to the Kiali route. Both `.spec.server.write_timeout` and `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=` must be greater than `query_timeout`.
<2> If you are not using the default HTTP or gRPC port for Jaeger or Tempo, replace the `in_cluster_url:` port with your custom port.
+
[NOTE]
====
Kiali 1.73 uses the Jaeger Query API, which causes a longer response time depending on Tempo resource limits. If you see a `Could not fetch spans` error message in the Kiali UI, then check your Tempo configuration or reduce the limit per query in Kiali.
====

. Send requests to your application.

. Verify the `istiod` pod logs and the `otel-collector` pod logs.

> == Configuring the {TempoName} in a mTLS encrypted Service Mesh member namespace

Author: Thinking outloud...Would this be better served as its own module? It may get lost/missed/ignored as part of `ossm-configuring-distr-tracing-tempo.adoc`

Author: Maybe not...since the rest of the Tempo/OTEL configuration is the same. Moving this to a separate module might be more confusing.

Reviewer 4: If you think you'll use this procedure somewhere else, you should modularize it. You have a heading already. It will appear the same way in the production docs anyway if you call the module at the same-level heading. Seamless to the user.

Author: The structure, to module or not module, may be revisited for OSSM 3.0.

[NOTE]
====
You don't need this additional DestinationRule configuration if you have created a TempoStack instance in a regular namespace i.e. not in a Service Mesh member namespace.
====

When you enable Service Mesh dataPlane mTLS encryption and you create a TempoStack instance in a Service Mesh member namespace such as `tracing-system-mtls`, all traffic is TLS encrypted. This is not expected from the Tempo distributed service and it returns TLS error in this scenario.

> You can apply the following example to disable the TLS trafficPolicy for fixing the {TempoName} TLS error.

Reviewer 3: Don't we also need DestinationRule for Kiali as it is described in the Google Doc?

Reviewer: yes, from Kiali configuration.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: tempo
  namespace: tracing-system-mtls
spec:
  host: "*.tracing-system-mtls.svc.cluster.local"
  trafficPolicy:
    tls:
      mode: DISABLE

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: kiali
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  host: kiali.istio-system.svc.cluster.local                        
  trafficPolicy:
    tls:
      mode: DISABLE
----
```

spec:
  external_services:
    tracing:
      query_timeout: 30 #<1>
      enabled: true
      in_cluster_url: 'http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tracing-system.svc.cluster.local:16685'
      url: '[Tempo query frontend Route url]'
      use_grpc: true # <2>
----

> <1> The default `query_timeout` is 30. If you set it greater than 30, you need to update `.spec.server.write_timeout` in the Kiali CR and add the annotation `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=50s` to the Kiali route. Both `.spec.server.write_timeout` and `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=` must be greater than `query_timeout`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<1> The default `query_timeout` value is 30 seconds. If you set the value to greater than 30 seconds, you must update `.spec.server.write_timeout` in the Kiali CR and add the annotation `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=50s` to the Kiali route. Both `.spec.server.write_timeout` and `haproxy.router.openshift.io/timeout=` must be greater than `query_timeout`.
```
Is this seconds? Can I use a fractional value like 35.5? Probably a good idea to define the valid values and syntax for them.

> <2> If you are not using the default HTTP or gRPC port for Jaeger or Tempo, replace the `in_cluster_url:` port with your custom port.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<2> If you are not using the default HTTP or gRPC port for Jaeger or {TempoName}, replace the `in_cluster_url:` port with your custom port.
```
Should Tempo use the attribute?

+
[NOTE]
====
Kiali 1.73 uses the Jaeger Query API, which causes a longer response time depending on Tempo resource limits. If you see a `Could not fetch spans` error message in the Kiali UI, then check your Tempo configuration or reduce the limit per query in Kiali.
====

. Send requests to your application.

. Verify the `istiod` pod logs and the `otel-collector` pod logs.

> == Configuring the {TempoName} in a mTLS encrypted Service Mesh member namespace

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[id="configuring-tempo-mtls-encrypted-namespace_{context}"]
== Configuring the {TempoName} in an mTLS encrypted Service Mesh member namespace
```
section needs an ID
a/an for how the next letter is spoken, which is "em" here

[NOTE]
====

> You don't need this additional `DestinationRule` configuration if you have created a TempoStack instance in a regular namespace i.e. not in a Service Mesh member namespace.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You don't need this additional `DestinationRule` configuration if you created a TempoStack instance in a namespace that is not a Service Mesh member namespace.
```

====

> When you enable Service Mesh `dataPlane` mTLS encryption and you create a TempoStack instance in a Service Mesh member namespace such as `tracing-system-mtls`, all traffic is TLS encrypted. This is not expected from the Tempo distributed service and it returns a TLS error.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All traffic is TLS encrypted when you enable Service Mesh `dataPlane` mTLS encryption and you create a TempoStack instance in a Service Mesh member namespace such as `tracing-system-mtls`. This encryption is not expected from the Tempo distributed service and returns a TLS error.
```

> To fix the TLS error, you can disable the TLS `trafficPolicy` by applying a `DestinationRule` for Tempo and Kiali:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To fix the TLS error, disable the TLS `trafficPolicy` by applying a `DestinationRule` for Tempo and Kiali:
```
